Hello folks,
Sorry for not posting for a while. A thief stole my smartphone on Tom Mboya Street and threw me in disarray. So today we shall learn about thieves and related terms. Not to worry, I have forgiven the thief and made "lemon Juice" from the lemon, with this lesson. Here we go:

THIMO YA ŨMŨTH Ĩ - PROVERB FOR TODAY
Mũici athamagia mũrogi – The thief makes even the poisoner (evil person) change residence.
Mũici – thief; Aici – thieves; Kũiya – to steal
Athamagia – he/she makes one to move (from home); Gũthama – to change residence; Mũthami – He/she who changes residence
Mũrogi – Poisoner (note, a traditional doctor is a “Mũgo”, a respected term). Poisoners were despised, operated in secrecy and when found out they were put to death. Their clients however knew where to find them.
So, according to this proverb, the thief is despised even by the Poisoner, an equally if not more evil person.

Picture of mobile phone courtesy of: http://www.freepik.com
…………………………………………………………………
Mũici nĩ mũtunyani – a thief takes takes by force
Mũtunyani – one who takes by guile, force or from those with less power
Gũtunya – to take away by guile, force or from those with less power
Ndunya wone – take away from me and see (get in trouble)
Ndũkandunye – Do not take away from me
Ũtunyĩirwo thimũ kũ?- From where was your phone ‘taken away from you’ (if it happened today)
Ũratunyĩirwo thimũ kũ ? - From where was your phone ‘taken away from you’ (if it happened yesterday)
Watunyĩirwo thimũ kũ ? - From where was your phone ‘taken away from you’ (if it happened day before yesterday or further in the- past)
gũkũ; Here - (a big geographical area eg. Town, country) Kũ ? – where; kũũrĩa - there
haha; here – a small geographical area eg. Where am standing) harĩa – over there; Ha – where?
For more information on Past tenses, follow this link:

https://hubpages.com/educ.../The-Kikuyu-language-Past-tenses

Ũgwĩkaga atĩa ũgĩtunywo – what were doing when ‘you were being dispossessed?’
Atĩa ? - what ? ; Ũũ - like this ( it can also mean 'who?' depending on tone).
Atĩ atĩa ; 'what have you just said? (implies wonder or shock)
Nĩ atĩa; How is it ( a form of greeting with the response - ni kwega - it is good
Ngũthiaga wĩra – I was going to work
Ũgũthiaga mũciĩ – you were going home
Egũthiaga thukuru – he/she was going to school
Megũthiaga kanitha – they were going to church
Tũgũthiaga mũthigiti – we were going to the mosque. See less